Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Mandy Estola. She's assistant
professor of philosophy at the Delft University of Technology.
Her research focuses on character. And today we're going
to talk about character, virtues and vices, the sense
of humor, group characters, and Mendevillian virtues and vices.
So, Doctor Estolo, welcome to the show. It's a
huge pleasure to have you
on. Thank you. It's very nice to be on
the show, and these are my favorite topics, so
I'm always happy to talk about them.
Great. So let's start with this question then. What
is character? I mean, particularly in the context of
philosophy, what does character mean?
Yeah, what is character? That's a really good starting
question, um. I would say that nowadays when we
talk about character, at least when I talk about
character, I roughly just mean personality and especially your
moral personality, and I tend to think of character
as Consisting out of character traits, so you are
actually a bundle of character traits, and character traits
are these long term and stable dispositions to act
or behave in a certain way or to think
in a certain way. Um, LIKE, for example, when
a person is compassionate, then they have this reemerging
desire to help others or for example, a re-emerging
sort of feeling of compassion for others, and they
tend to respond to the pain of others with
a certain emotional response and that emotion motivates a
certain kind of action and yeah, this, this bundle
of traits that you have makes up your character.
And um there's also what I really like about
the word character is that there's also another meaning
to it. So when we say that somebody is
a character. We mean that they're kind of weird,
right? So they're a weirdo. Um, THEY deviate from
the norm in some way, and musicians talk about
distortion giving a sound character. So there's a sense
in which when something becomes a bit weird or
a bit distorted or a bit, you know, not
quite as it should be, we tend to call
it character as well, and the word character actually
comes from from an old Greek word. Which means
like an engraved mark, kind of like an engraving
in stone, and um it's it's a bit like
your soul is a is a slab of stone
and something has been engraved into that stone, and
that is, is your character.
So, and how, how do you, do we evaluate
character? I mean, how do we determine whether uh
a particular character is good or bad?
Yeah. Yeah, I think that we, we all kind
of know the answer to that. At least if
you ask a random person what kind of people
do you really, can you really not stand? Usually
people have a pretty well worked out moral theory
in response to that, you know, to the question
what kinds of people are good and what kinds
of people are bad. And I think a very
attractive answer and an attractive philosophical answer to how
do we evaluate character is the idea that a
good person lives well with others. So a good
person is often also admirable. So a good person
is someone that we admire and the opposite of
that, a bad person is someone that we don't
admire, someone that we wish not to be like.
And when we get to know a person, we
discover what their character traits are because we see
them perform certain actions over and over again and
often we respond to certain character traits with a
negative withdrawing emotion. So when someone's, for example, very
full of themselves, we might respond to that with
a sense of annoyance or a sense of, oh,
there's something not right about this person. Um, OR
when somebody maybe has very good intentions but just
has no idea how to read the room, we
kind of cringe at them, right? That's another sort
of withdrawing emotion that we have. And also when
somebody says one thing and then does another, then
we get a, we get a kind of a
suspicion about that person. We are less likely to
want to go near them and get closer to
them. Um, UNLESS we're fascinated by that kind of
thing, of course, which also happens a lot because
vices and virtues are very complex, right? But these
emotions that we have in response to the traits
of others when we perceive them, they are kind
of signals, you know, they can be like warning
signals to us for whether that person is good.
For our community or for our flourishing, right? So
the idea that a good person lives well with
others, that's something that I think we respond to
when we have a negative emotional response to someone's
character, um, but very important, I think that another
thing that we also respond to. When we look
at the character of others, is whether some behavior
from a person is a, is an incident, whether
it's a fluke, whether it only happens once, or
whether it's really a stable part of their character.
So when we're, when we see someone behave in
a way that we react negatively to, then We
often also try to judge whether that how deep
that trait goes. So if someone's a bit full
of themselves, maybe they might also just be drunk.
It might be a single incident. They might have
just had a really bad day and they might
need to kind of boost their ego a little
bit, which is why they're acting like that. But
if they do it again and again and again
and every time you see them, then we start
to think, OK, this, this might actually be a
very deep part of this person's character and the
deeper the bad traits, the more negatively we judge
it and the same. Of course goes for good
traits. So the deeper a good trait, whether someone
being compassionate or benevolent or fair minded, whether that's
just a fluke, if that's just a fluke, then
we don't respond to it as positively as we
do when it's a stable part of their character.
Mhm.
I
mean,
do good and bad character traits correspond respectively to
virtues and vices.
Yes, yeah, absolutely. I, I think so. So. In
general, good character traits are those traits that lead
us towards better flourishing, so living well together with
others over the course of our lives, and bad
traits are vices which kind of do the opposite.
But I should say here that there is some
There is some debate here and I think a
very difficult question in this exact field of which
bad traits are vices and which good traits are
virtues is the question that We need to decide
what we do as a theorists with traits that
are a result of a mental illness. So for
example, we see self-reflectiveness and temperance as good character
traits, um, because a self-reflective person is likely to
realize when they are overreacting to something and correct
themselves, for example, um, and a temperate person is
less likely to kind of indulge in their answer
in their anger, sorry, um, through insults and, um,
you know. Revenge at the cost of their relationships.
Um, BUT in some cases, the reason why somebody
is lacking temperance or lacking self-reflection is it can
be a result of mental illness, right? So Um,
if somebody has bipolar disorder or borderline personality disorder,
these symptoms can manifest in ways that resemble vicious
behavior, and this is a really difficult question in
virtue ethics. What do we do with this? Do
we call this a vice as well? Some people
like to put traits like that in a different
category, so Call it a personalist trait and to
try to kind of separate the person from the
psychological condition that they have, whereas other people think
that every single person should be responsible for everything
that they are and the ones that have a
mental illness just have a larger kind of cross
to bear. Um, BUT I, yeah, I'm not sure
where I am on this debate, but I, yeah,
I just wanted to mention that it that it
is very difficult sometimes to talk about virtues and
vices.
Right, but talking about virtues and vices, there is
virtue ethics and also virtue epistemology. Could you tell
us about each of them? I mean, what is
virtue ethics and what is virtue epistemology?
Yeah, of course, yeah, yeah, yeah, so, um. The
reason why I love character so much, um, is
that as a As an ethicist, um, and also
as a human being, um, I'm interested in the
good life and how to lead a good life.
What does it mean to do the right thing
and what does it mean to do the wrong
thing? Um, AND as an epistemologist, epistemologist, a study
of knowledge, and also as a human being, I'm
interested in how to separate truth from falsity and,
you know, understanding how we get to know things
and I've always had the sense that the for
me the best answer, the best way to approach
both of those questions is by looking at the
character of the person doing the acting or the
knowing. Um SO I don't think that there is
any Universal kind of principle or ideal that is
going to tell us which actions are bad and
which actions are good or what is truth and
what is falsity, what is knowledge and what, what
is, you know, the whatever the opposite of knowledge
is, right, stupidity. I don't think that there's any
principle or framework that's going to tell us that.
um SO the best thing that we can do.
IS to focus on thinking about what is the
kind of, what sorts of character traits, what sorts
of dispositions can we develop in ourselves so that
we are more likely to do the right thing
or more likely to, you know, get the right
answer to a question or think about something in
a, in an epistemically virtuous way. Um, SO that's
a little bit what Virtue, ethics, and virtue epistemology
are for me they're ways at understanding the good
life and understanding knowledge by looking at what kind
of character traits, improve our contact with reality, and
yield knowledge, and what kinds of character traits improve
our contact with the good.
So could you give us an examples of good
and bad traits uh that we can point to
in ethics and also good and bad traits in
the context of epistemology.
Yeah, sure. Yeah, so maybe let's start with ethics,
um. But before I say anything, I should say
that the separation between epistemic and moral virtues, I
always think of it as a very artificial separation.
So I think as a human being there are
certain traits that are going to make you excellent
and certain traits that are going to make you
less excellent. And some of those have more to
do with how we come to know facts about
the world and others have more to do with
how we lead our moral lives. So we make
a kind of an artificial sort of separation between
the moral and the epistemic virtues, but really they
are all kind of the same thing or kind
of very similar, I think. Um, SO if we
start with the moral ethical virtues, um. A nice
one is, I think, courage. So people are good,
there's one way of being good is being courageous.
And courage is a trait that um involves a
kind of reasserting motive to Go against something that
you fear, because you know that it is noble,
right? So, courage is a way of kind of
eating your fear, eating your own fear and deriving
power out of it. And In the Aristotelian model
of the virtues, the virtue is always in the
middle, and at the two opposite extremes there are
two vices. So Aristotle talks about courage as being
in the middle between cowardice and foolhardiness. So somebody
who has an excess of fear, or maybe um
Acts in accordance with their fear a little too
much or has a deficiency of, you know, the
noble sense that makes you act against your fear,
they're going to be cowardly, whereas a person who
is likely to sort of who has a has
a deficiency of fear is often going to be
foolhardy. Um, AND in the middle is courage. Um,
SO that's just one example of a, of a
moral virtue. Of course, there is also something like
epistemic courage, um, so for example, We might say
of a Of a scientist, um. Who maybe goes
against who has a who's developing a theory that
goes against the current norms or even goes against
their previous work, we might, we might speak of
that as intellectual courage or even tackling a question
that is very difficult to tackle or very confrontational
to tackle, we might also call that intellectual courage.
But maybe a Another very, another nice example of
a more epistemic virtue is open-mindedness, and I tend
to think of open-mindedness as the ability to be
receptive to new ideas and to respond to new
ideas, and that also kind of in my view
has like an Aristotelian middle between two extremes kind
of structure, um. Because open-mindedness could be seen as
being in the middle between intellectual servility, so the
fact that you just believe whatever people tell you
basically, without questioning it. And on the other hand,
closed-mindedness. So when you're not receptive to new ideas
at all. Um, SO then you see that moral
and epistemic virtues have a very, or often have
a very similar structure.
But then if virtues stand between two extremes, or
at least some of them stand between two extremes,
are both extremes vices.
Yeah, yeah, so in the traditionally in the, in
the Aristotelian model, it is, they are actually always
considered vices and by the way, it doesn't have
to be two extremes. There can be multiple extremes
and one kind of virtue in the middle. Aristotle,
I think, I think Aristotle said that there is
really only one way to be good. Um, BUT
badness is diverse, so there's many different ways to
be bad, but being good, if you think of
like really good people, they're always kind of the
same person because the virtues also support each other.
So the idea is that you have sort of
goodness in the middle and then you have all
these deviations of goodness on the sides which are
all different ways of being bad, yeah. Right.
So let me ask you specifically about uh the
sense of humor. Is it a moral virtue even
if it's dark and twisted?
Yeah, yeah, so I, I find sense of humor
a really interesting virtue for, for many reasons, um.
I think that humor, so what I said earlier
about moral virtues and epistemic virtues, the division between
them being a bit artificial, I think that a
sense of humor is an, is an example where
you see how artificial that division is because when
you have a sense of humor, it's, it's a
very cognitive, very in. INTELLECTUAL, uh, type of virtue
that requires a lot of, uh, intelligence actually. So
in a sense, it's, it's very much epistemic. Um,
IT can also help you to discover new truths
about the world. So in that sense, it's also
epistemic, but it's also very clearly moral, um. So
I think Aristotle talks about sense, doesn't talk about
sense of humor, but talks about wit, and by
wit, I've always understood him to mean something like
a kind of social easiness. It's almost like it
it it wit is the thing that makes you
pleasant to be around. Um, OF course you're And
if you're compassionate and courageous and all of these
other things, but you know, sometimes moral saints can
be very sort of boring and intimidating and not
very nice to be around, right? So wit is
the thing that softens you to other people and
makes you approachable. And if we take the definition
of virtue to be that which helps you to
live well with others, then obviously something like wit
is going to help you to live well with
others. Um, SO there's that aspect to it, um.
But I've, so I've, I've written about a sense
of humor with colleagues and We were kind of
also exploring the idea that a sense of humor
might be even a higher order virtue, an executive
virtue, as it's called, because it sort of helps
other virtues that you have. It controls the other
virtues in your character. Um, SO, for example, humor
can actually make you more courageous. So if we
think about courage as being um the medium between
cowardice and foolhardiness. It could be that you're suffering
from an excess of fear, and that excess of
fear is making you cowardly. If you manage to
make a joke about the object of your fear.
Then this might help you to be more courageous.
And so in the in the article that I
wrote together with a colleague we used as an
example a collection of stamps that came out in
Ukraine just after the war started, which was kind
of a sort of a mocking, mocking the enemy
was the object of the stamps, and there you
see the idea that if you ridicule something that
is an that is an object of fear or
anxiety, then it becomes easier to kind of affirm.
Um, THE noble thing that you're going against your
fear for. So that's just one example. I think
humor helps many other virtues as well. It can
help us be more hopeful, but it can also
help us avoid things like toxic positivity. It can
also help us to check others. So when somebody's
acting out of line instead of sort of Condemning
them very strictly, we might just make a joke,
and it's a much nicer way of them to
let somebody know that they're behaving out of line
um than to be kind of very serious about
it. So there's many ways in which humor just
makes our life easier and makes us more approachable.
Um, YEAH, so I think of it almost as
a kind of executive virtue that controls other virtues,
but at the same time, I think you could
also see it on the Aristotelian spectrum of the
virtue in the middle and the two extremes, two
or more extremes at the ends, um. I've always
thought of kind of boorishness on one end of
the spectrum, like when somebody's really not, doesn't just
doesn't understand humor, isn't receptive to a joke at
all, is way too serious. They can be boorish,
but on the other side, when someone's like, Really
like, like a buffoon, like buffoonery, making stupid jokes
all the time and doesn't, isn't able to read
the room and, you know, tries to be funny
but ends up just being offensive and annoying. Then
that's, those are also kind of like two ends
of the spectrum and a and a good sense
of humor is somewhere in the middle. And actually
I think a good sense of humor requires a
lot of intelligence, um, so it's extremely epistemic.
Mhm. Uh, I mean, when we talk about character
traits, we usually think about or refer to individual
character traits. We are more talking about individuals, but
do groups also have characters and how do they
manifest?
Yeah, I'm glad you asked. This is one of
my favorite topics, um. Yes, so I think that
groups definitely have characters. You only need to think
about the last three groups that you've been a
part of. So whatever that is, whether it's like
a sports team, whether it's a company that you've
worked for, whether it's your ex-partner's family, right, um.
You can tell that groups have different character traits,
bigger groups do and smaller groups do as well.
And I think that just like with an individual
person whose character grows slowly over time and can
be nourished and can be affected by external circumstances
in the same way, a group also grows a
character over time. And that's why if you Something
like a group of people sitting on a bus
that have only maybe seen each other um for
for 10 minutes. Um, I wouldn't say that they
really have a group character, but if you think
about a group that meets over a long period
of time, then they have the space and the
time to develop a character, just like an individual
person and actually Um, Aristotle and Plato, they both
talked about city states as being a kind of
mirror for the individual person. So just like the
soul should have this component and that component and
possess this virtue and that virtue in the same
way, the city should also have different groups of
people that possess different virtues, right? Um. And I
think Aristotle even had this, had this sort of
metaphor of the city being like one man with
lots of feet and lots of hands, and the
more diversity you have in it, also the more
wisdom you have in it. Um, Yeah.
So, uh, let me ask you then, what is
collective intelligence and what do you think is important
for us to know about it to then apply
virtue ethics and virtue epistemology to groups?
Uh, YEAH, so collective intelligence, um, yes, this is
a good topic, um. So, like I said earlier,
Aristotle said that there was only one way to
be good, but badness is kind of diverse and
devious, um. If you think about that, and then
you think about what collective intelligence is, um, then
I think you quickly realize that collective intelligence tends
to arise out of diversity. So Mills's idea of
the marketplace of ideas being a good kind of
society when there's a lot of diverse people living
very diverse lives, there's lots of different ideas to
choose from, right? And this is actually epistemically valuable,
so diversity has lots of value, and the idea
of the wisdom of the crowds is actually also
dependent on You know, intelligence being dispersed by there
being lots of lots of diversity. Um, SO then
when you think about virtue being sort of uniform
and vice being diverse, um, Yeah, then you start
to see that there might actually be ways in
which More diversity, having some, having some diversity, um,
in terms of virtue as well might actually be
good for a group. Um, SO collective intelligence, I
think this point sort of links very closely with,
with my idea of Mandevillian virtue. So maybe Maybe
it's an idea to to move to that, or
shall we do collective virtues first? Uh
YEAH, let's do collective virtues first and then we'll
talk about Mendevillian virtues and vices, so.
Yeah, OK. OK, so collective virtues like that. I
think this is a good bridge there, right? So,
um, For a very long time I've thought about
this issue of can we take something like virtue
ethics and virtue epistemology and apply it to groups
of people, because if you take Plato and Aristotle's
suggestion that the city is kind of a man
with multiple hands and feet and um, you know,
is one big collective agent, then maybe we should
also be talking about the virtues and vices of
groups, right? Um, I feel that we often do
if we, if we look at, for example, um,
you know, people, people will often say like, oh,
Shell is an irresponsible company or the government is
the government is being idiotic or something like that.
So in our just natural language use we tend
to attribute vices and virtues to groups all the
time, so. Maybe we should have some theory supporting
that as well. Um, SO that's something I've been
thinking about a lot. And so maybe one example
of a collective virtue is something that I've written
about together with colleagues, which is collective intellectual humility.
Um, SO earlier I talked about intellectual humility being
a kind of, or sorry, um, I talked about
open-mindedness, but intellectual humility is slightly different. Intellectual humility
is a is a trait that is considered an
epistemic virtue, and intellectual humility is basically the ability
to correctly assess your own um intellectual capacities. So
being sort of overconfident might be on one side.
And on the other side being kind of, you
know, servile or underestimating yourself intellectually, and an intellectually
humble person is someone who is able to respond
to. Opposing viewpoints and you know doesn't kind of
overestimate themselves or underestimate themselves. And If you think
about intellectual humility inside the individual, you have a,
you have a certain, you know, you have an
image of an intellectually humble person in mind, but
of course this trait, everything that the intellectually humble
person does can also be displayed by a group.
So for example, if a community has a really
strong norm about dissenting majority viewpoints. Um, IF a
group has a strong norm that everybody should be
able to voice their opinion, and that if there
is a certain, um, For example, if there's a
certain idea which is very prevalent, that it is
OK to challenge that idea, um, then these are
sort of system properties that are gonna likely in
many situations going to lead that group to be
more intellectually humble and we can contrast that with,
for example, a group that has a very strong
hierarchical norm. So if you think about like a
company where you have a really dictatorial boss, um,
who you are not allowed to challenge ever. And
then whenever they say something, everybody else knows that
they kind of have to go along with it,
otherwise they'll get fired. If you have a group
with a culture and a kind of policy that
really discourages dissenting, um, then I think Even if
individuals might privately disagree with the boss, they're most
likely going to just go along with the boss,
and it could be that even in their personal
lives, everybody who works there is in fact very
good at dissenting the majority viewpoint, but it could
be that they simply cannot do so because the
structures in that workplace make it so that it
is impossible for them to dissent. So then you
get actually a group. Which displays intellectual servility or
gullibility even though all of the people in that
group might actually be very intellectually humble and very
willing to challenge majority viewpoints in their private lives.
And in contrast to that, you can also have
a group that arranges its policies and its culture
and its norms in such a way that you
get collective intellectual humility.
Right, but I mean, when it comes to collective
virtues and vices, are they the same as the
individual virtues and vices, or do they differ from
one another?
Yeah, that's, yeah, that, that's a really good question
and also very, very difficult question, I think. Um,
HOW I would answer to that is that I
think that just like in individuals. In groups, you
have different levels of robustness. And Maybe it helps
if I just explain this idea of kind of
robustness of a virtue. So, Sometimes an individual, let's
let's start with the individual person. Sometimes an individual
person might look virtuous from the outside, but it
could be that that virtue is actually very fragile
or very situational. Um, SO to use an example
from literature, I've just finished a wonderful book by
Iris Murdoch called The Sacred and Profane Love Machine.
And in that book there is a character, a
woman whose husband cheats on her, and it turns
out that the husband has a second family that
this woman has had no idea about for years
and years. Obviously she is distraught, but she reacts
like an angel. So she tells the man off,
but she forgives him and she reaches out to
the other woman. And she makes sure that the
husband gives her a fairer sort of financial share
to sort of put her son to a good
school and so on. So you see actually a
woman that is responding to a kind of moral
crisis, responding to wrongdoing to her like an angel.
But then as the plot progresses, um, it turns
out that The woman is responding like an angel.
She's displaying forgiveness, but she is doing it because
her forgiveness makes others dependent on her and appreciative
of her. And as soon as this kind of
as the caring relationship between them and as soon
as the appreciativeness disappears, then she completely crumbles and
falls apart, and I think that. We recognize this
behavior in um in, in many of the people
around us, right? Something can look like a virtue,
but then it can turn out that for example,
somebody's um Generosity is linked to a kind of
will for control of the other person or it
can be linked to an anxiety about something which
is actually detrimental to the person's flourishing and not
kind of helping their flourishing. So in a case.
Like in the character in the book that I
just described, the lady who's cheated on reacts like
an angel but does so so that she kind
of has, you know, so that everybody is dependent
on her. This is a case of a more
fragile virtue. So it's, it is virtue in a
particular situation, but as soon as that situation changes,
she actually just falls apart, whereas a person who
is able to be forgiving, um, Across a range
of situations and is able to respond to the
situation changing with a similar kind of sense of
forgiveness, then, then you would say that That the
trait is deep, that it is robust. So within
an individual person there's different levels, levels of robustness
of a virtue, and the same goes for vices,
I think. Some people are only vicious in a,
in a very specific situation in a very specific
relationship or constellation of people around you, but that
can, that can also just change. It can be
that the vice is not a deep feature of
somebody at all. So that's robustness. Um, NOW, I
think that in collectives, You have a similar thing.
So a group of people that are on an
airplane and the airplane is delayed, they might kind
of like band together and they might say, Hey,
we're, you know what, we're all of us together,
we're going to ask this airline for compensation. We'll
band together and we'll, and we'll do this. In
such a case, we can say that the group
of people, the group of passengers. Shows a kind
of collective perseverance, but this kind of collective perseverance
is probably not going to be very robust because
this group hasn't had time to sort of form
and become a real group agent. So if you
look at like an activist movement or for example,
you know, perhaps a civil society group or a
company or a family or a group of people
that needs to Together very often, then they might
have a much more robust form of group perseverance.
Um, SO I do think that there are, there
are similarities, but there are also differences. I think
that there might be some virtues that only groups
can possess. Um, YEAH, I mean, a lot of
people talk about something like inclusivity being a good
feature of a group, um. I have no idea
how an individual person could be inclusive because I
think that the word inclusiveness implies actually that there
is a that there is a group doing it.
An individual person cannot be inclusive. I mean they
can be unbiased, they can be kind, they can
be respectful, but an individual cannot be inclusive. So
these are kind of, I would say these are
examples of things that we might call group virtues.
Right, but.
Uh, YEAH, but, but when we see the same
virtue or the same vice in individuals and collectives,
are the collective traits just scaled up versions of
the respective individual traits or not?
Yeah, yeah, right, um, so I actually think that
it can be very, it's very useful to think
of it in that way, um, because if you
think about something like individual, uh, you know, being
compassionate, a compassionate person, then they're gonna have certain
Certain motives that keep reasserting themselves. They might have
certain personal principles that they adhere to and they
might have a certain, you know, self-image regarding that,
um, that, that trait that they have which also
keeps it going and keeps them motivated to sort
of feed and continue um displaying that trait, um.
Then if you look at something like a group
that is compassionate. I think that we can see
a lot of analogs between the individual components of
virtue and components of group virtue. So even though
a group is not a person in the same
way that an individual is, they don't have, for
example, emotions in the same way. It's, it's, they
don't have a kind of um It might be
difficult to make that kind of comparison. Do groups
have, uh, for example, ideas? Do groups have emotions,
um, Our groups a moral person in the same
way that an individual is, um, but I think
that there's many analogs. So, for example, there's been
a lot of work on collective emotions. So if
you see, for example, Um, A company responding to
a serious financial threat, um, or for example, a
group, a platoon of soldiers uh responding very quickly
to a threat. There is a sense in which
there is a kind of collective emotion there and
there's also um a collective motivations can also have
collective analogs. So for example, If somebody appoints you
at your workplace to be The sort of health
and safety steward or something like that and then
you're sitting in a meeting and you're in the
role of the, you know, health health steward of
your of your group or whatever and then there's
a question about whether we should provide. Alcoholic drinks
at, you know, social events of the group, then
you might privately think, well, actually, I would like
to have a drink at these events. I, I
think it's a pretty good idea, it would be
nice. Um. But because you are in your institutional
role of, you know, the health representative, then you
might for that reason say we should not have
alcohol there because you put on a kind of
a mask when you are in an institutional role,
and that makes you act in a certain way.
So it could be that for example you have
a board of directors who all privately disagree with
a certain policy, but because of their role in
being the board of directors, they say, OK, no.
We must, we must agree with this policy because
it's in line with the interests that we should
have with regard to the role that we have
here. So this is a situation where you see
that the collective motive and the collective motivation to
do something really comes apart from the individual motivation.
So in this way, I do think that there
is a kind of analogy there. It's not always
going to be perfect, um. But there are very
similar components of virtue inside a collective as there
are in the individual person.
Mhm. I understand. So let me ask you a
question that I think will make for a good
segue into Mendevillian virtues and vices. Are virtues always
virtues and vices always vices independently of the context?
Yeah. Yeah, right. Our virtues always virtues and our
vices always vices. Um, SO in many cases, like
I said earlier, it's really complicated to disentangle. Sort
of when is a trait of virtue and when
is a trait of vice. Um, I think even
the question of How do we separate a single
character out of the complex mess of what a
human being in its entirety is? Um, THAT'S already
a difficult question, uh, let alone to kind of
give it a normative label, um. But I do
think that if we have managed to disentangle, we
have managed to point to using a word, a
tendency in a human being that is likely to
lead them away from flourishing considering the greater scheme
of things in the entirety of their life, then
I would say that that is going to be
always a vice. Um, AND if we have managed
to point to a trait that is going to
lead them towards flourishing or a kind of admirable
existence, then that is always going to be a
virtue, but virtue on the individual level. So given
that person's life, yeah, um, so I, I do
think that virtues and vices actually exist, um.
So, uh, let me ask you then, let's get
into the topic of Mendevillian virtues and vices. So
let's start with the virtues. So what are Mendevillian
virtues and what would be examples of it, of
them?
Yeah. Yeah, right. So, virtues, if we can really
truly disentangle a virtue, if we can truly say
yes, this is indeed going to help your flourishing,
and that is a virtue, and if we find
a vice, then that is a vice, um. But
many years ago, I read a paper by a
colleague, uh, my colleague Paul Smart, on Mandevillian intelligence,
and this is a paper that really kind of
threw me in a loop at the time. Um,
I've always been very convinced of the idea that
virtues and vices do exist. Um, But this paper
pointed out to me that simulations with network models
sometimes show that if you've got like a network
of nodes, nodes that represent people that are trying
to figure out some epistemic task, then sometimes this
group of nodes actually figures things out better. When
some of these notes are, um, Stupid Um, or
cognitively suboptimal. So actually a network can get smarter
when it includes stupider nodes. Now, um, What do
I mean by that? Um, WHAT I mean is
that let's say that they are playing a kind
of, um, let's say that they are playing a
game where they have to Choose between sort of
where they have to explore an area and see
where they can find resources. Um, SO then every
node has the kind of has a choice between,
OK, where do I go next? Do I see
whether I can, I can get some, get some
resources in this area? Can I find some resources
in another area? And if they see another node,
acquire resources somewhere else, then they might go and
copy that node, right? So if we're playing, if
we've got a problem space like that, then actually,
In these cases with a certain kind of problem
space, when one of these nodes has very strong
priors, so for example, they think they are biased
towards there being resources in that direction for no
apparent reason. They just think, you know, there's something
in that direction. I don't know why, but I
just want to go that way. Then they might
actually behave in a way that is less rational,
so they might see all their neighbors around. Going
to a certain area and getting lots of resources
there, um, But then because they are biased in
this way, they are likely to go the other
way anyway, even though it is actually much more
rational to follow what the rest of the group
is doing. Um. And what this, what this means
is that a group with those kinds of notes,
um, Cognitively suboptimal nodes, irrational nodes, is actually gonna
perform better as a group because there is a
wider scope of exploration, um. So cognitively suboptimal nodes
or people can actually be beneficial for the rest
of the group because they explore areas that would
otherwise not be explored and they make sure that
the group does not kind of converge on a
suboptimal solution way too quickly, that they don't kind
of all settle on a consensus because it seems
like the most rational thing to do, but that
they kind of keep exploring um. And this kind
of thing works in computer simulations, but there's lots
of arguments for this being the case in the
philosophy of uh sort of in the, in the
history of science as well. So there's an example.
That I've read about a few times, um, which
is about The discovery of the cause of stomach
ulcers of a certain kind of stomach ulcer. Um,
INITIALLY people thought that it was, yeah, there was
lots of hypotheses for what it could be. One
of them was the bacterial hypothesis. And then somebody
did an experiment that seemed very legit that actually
showed that it cannot be the bacterial hypothesis. It
was rational at the time just to go with
that, but then it turned out that there was
a very unlikely flaw in the experiment, and the
bacterial hypothesis turned out to be the correct one.
And the reason why we discovered this, this. IS
because there were scientists that were sort of very
dogmatic and arrogant about the bacterial hypothesis being correct,
even though all the evidence was pointing to a
completely different direction. So that's an example of, you
know, suboptimal cognitive behavior being good for a group,
not just in a computer model but also really
in a practice like science, um. Now, when I,
when I read this paper, when I started getting
into this stuff, um, I immediately started to think,
hmm, OK, if this is the case in epistemology,
if it is possible that Epistemic vices which are
bad for the knowledge of the individual are actually
good for the knowledge of the group. Could that
be the case for ethics as well? So could
it be the case that people that have moral
vices are actually beneficial to groups? And I started
thinking about this, um, and I realized that Exactly
the same kind of mechanism that is responsible for
wisdom of the crowds is very likely going to
be responsible for something like moral wisdom or practical
wisdom. Because If you have got a group of
people and everybody is very, very virtuous, then very
often certain perspectives or views or pursuing a certain
issue, even though it seems like another issue is
much more important, you know, the virtuous people aren't
going to do that. Um, BUT the vicious people
might be much more sort of egoistic in towing
an issue that they care about, even though perhaps
they shouldn't be caring about it as much. But
this means that certain issues are addressed. So while
a very vicious person Might not Might not kind
of push an issue to the forefront, um, even
though it is an issue, but it simply isn't
a priority. A vicious person might be a bit
more sort of perseverant in doing that, which means
that the issue is addressed. Um, AND another maybe
a controversial example of this is like everybody thinks
that like bigoted people are very bad, and I
think that like, you know, often it sucks if
if you've got a bigot in your group, right?
Um. But let's say that The bigoted person. Say
some very bigoted things in public, then It might
give an opportunity for the other members of the
group to kind of stand up and oppose it
and to and to actually sort of acknowledge that
the issue is alive, so the sort of very
quiet morality that nobody talks about gets suddenly heated
up and it becomes an ethical discussion. Um, OF
course these situations can be very annoying, right, and
we don't always like to get into these discussions,
but they can also be very productive, and I
really think that they can also be moments where
the group sets new norms and takes a moment
to get everybody on board with those new norms,
right? Um, SO I don't think that annoying, you
know, sort of emotionally difficult political discussions are always
a bad thing. Disrupting the harmony isn't necessarily a
bad thing. Sometimes it is better that these things
bubble to the surface so that they can be
dealt with appropriately. So that's one example that I
think of when I think of moral vices actually.
Being more being sort of morally beneficial for a
group. Um, BUT there's another, there's another aspect to
this as well. So if you think about the
uh something like a division of labor, for any
task that human beings want to accomplish, it is
often efficient to have a division of labor. Um.
For something like mercy and punishment, um, it might
actually be much better if a group has people
that specialize in forgiveness and mercy, and others that
specialize in sort of vindictiveness and spitefulness and punishment.
Because if you think about the system of moral
norms that we have. It kind of needs, needs
both of those things. So we need some people
that are going to enforce a moral norm that
are going to punish you if you transgress it.
But then again, we also need a little bit
of flexibility because there might be special circumstances where
people cannot fulfill a certain moral norm, right? Um,
SO we do need people that are forgiving, and
we also need people that are harsh and merciless,
and It's very difficult for one person to be
both of those, um, to develop a skill in
being forgiving and also to develop a skill in
being very harsh and punishing. I think that in
most cases this is just not going to work
for a single person, maybe unless you are very,
very wise and you know exactly when to sort
of play a more harsh role and exactly when
to be more forgiving. But I think for the
vast majority of cases, it's gonna be better if
there's different people specializing in different things, so. Actually,
rather than having a bunch of very uniform, very
similar, very balanced individuals, I think we actually should
have some people that are very Punishing and spiteful
and others that are very forgiving. So I, I,
I prefer people with two opposite vices rather than
a set of virtuous people, and this is of
course very contradictory to virtue theory, but this is
just what I think.
So, uh, in the what, how about the Mendevillian
vices? What are them, and would, could you also
give us examples of that?
Yeah, sure. So Mandevillian virtues is when a vicious
person contributes to collective virtue. Um, But Mandevillian vices
are the opposite, so that's when The virtues of
a group of people actually culminate in something like
vice, um. An example of this could be something
like apt deference. So apt deference is an epistemic
virtue, and what it means is that when a
person does not know, um, does not know the
answer to some question, that they are able to
defer to somebody else who does. So for example,
saying something like, oh, I, well, I don't know
anything about, uh, I don't know anything about this
topic. I, I, I'm going to defer to this
expert, uh, who is an expert on this topic.
That's an example of apt deference. And it is
also a fact that when you don't know what
the best solution to a problem is, very often
the wisdom of the crowds, so the sort of
shared opinion of an entire group of people, is
more likely to be correct than your individual opinion.
So very often it is actually very rational for
people to defer to majority opinion because the majority
is very often right about things. So Then you
get a kind of paradoxical thing where if every
single person inside a group is an apt deferer
then in a situation where they don't know something,
where there aren't any experts to tell them what
to do, they're gonna defer to majority opinion. But
if everybody is deferring to majority opinion and if
it is also rational for everyone to defer to
majority opinion, then everybody is deferring to everyone and
everyone else is deferring to everyone else. And then
you get this weird sort of regressive deferring that
actually doesn't have any basis. So in order for
Majority opinion to be worth deferring to. You need
a diversity of people and you need some people
at least who are not just deferring to what
other people are doing, right? So that's, that's a
very clear example of a Mandevillian vice. So where
a good character trait like apt deference actually means
that um yeah, that you get this kind of
weird baseless collective behavior and I think that's um.
Yeah, and I think that the same kind of
the same goes for lots of other collective traits
as well, that they can sort of, even though
individually these traits are good, they culminate in something
negative. Mhm.
So, uh let me ask you then, particularly when
it comes to the Mendeelian virtues. Uh, I mean,
is it that because a rate, uh, that a
vice in particular individuals might end up being good
for the collective debt. I, I, I mean, does
that have any implications for how we think about
that particular vice on an individual level? I mean,
does it make it A good then or not?
Yeah, yeah, so it, it, it gets a bit
paradoxical, right? Um, BECAUSE if on the one hand
I'm saying that app deference is bad when everybody
has it, does that mean that it becomes a
vice for the individuals who have it? Um, AND
my, so my answer to that would be that
I still think that app deference is a virtue.
And I still think that a vice is a
vice, even if it has this kind of positive
effect within a group, but what we need to
do is we need to say we need to
see it as a vice on the individual level,
but a virtue on a collective level, right? So
we need to shift the lens or the sort
of system that we are assessing that trait in.
Um, SO I don't, I wouldn't say that a
trait suddenly becomes a virtue just because it is
useful in a particular context. I would say no,
it is still, it's still a vice because you
take that person and you put them in any
other context, most likely they're not going to flourish
there and they're not going to cause others to
flourish either. Yeah, so I think vices are just
vices and virtues are virtues. It's just if you
put them in a system with a bunch of
other people, then we need to evaluate it in
a slightly different way on a different level.
Right. So let me ask you one last question
then. How can virtue theory accommodate for Mendevillian emergent
goods?
Yeah, yeah, so this is um. Like, as I,
as you know, as we talked about before, um,
it's a bit of a paradox that vices can
sometimes be, you know, good or valuable and that
virtue can sometimes be bad. Um, SO I think
that virtue and vice ethics need a kind of
way to accommodate this. They need some kind of
answer to this problem. And the answer that I've
been developing in the last years is kind of
a kind of a threefold answer. There's probably lots
of other answers as well, but I think the
first move we can make as theorists is to
say that Mandevillian virtues or vices on the individual
level, but at the moment that somebody's sort of
bigoted character traits is causing a group to be
very reflective and intellectually humble. The group has a
virtue, but the individual still has a vice. So
it's about how that vice is embedded in the
rest of the group. So I think that there
is a, there is kind of like a, there
are two levels there. Something that is a vice
at the individual level can constitute or co-constitute a
virtue at the collective level. And I think when
you look at it like that, there doesn't need
to be a paradox there. So vice and virtue
are kind of like system properties that repeat themselves
at different ontological levels. And um you know, the
same goes for virtues as well. Like if you
have a Mandevillian, um, you know, so a Mandevillian
vice, so when lots of individually virtuous people culminate
in something bad, we say that the group has
a vice, but all those individuals, they're still virtuous.
So that's one way in which virtual theory can
respond by postulating that there is also something like
group character which is distinct from individual character. And
another thing that we might do is, we might
just say that there are different types of vices
and different types of virtues. So, We might say
that somebody's like bigotry is a motivational vice because
it's like the motivational structure behind it is one
that involves things like closed-mindedness and prejudice and bias
and perhaps even a disposition towards spite or hatred.
But we could see it as a teleological virtue.
We could see it as um as a kind
of um as a way of improving a certain
kind of group that somebody's a part of, right?
Um, SO we might say that there are different
virtues and vices and some of them are more
focused on achieving a certain goal, right? So that's
another way to make that difference. And Then another
thing we might do is to acknowledge the normativity
of vicious roles inside a group. So we might
say that For example, for every group that makes
decisions, there should be at least one. At least
one like asshole representing a certain perspective, right? There
should be at least kind of like a devil's
advocate, you know, a devil's advocate is a role
that is often given to people inside a group
and that can be very productive. But of course,
a devil's advocate role is most likely going to
be played much better by an actual devil than
an angel pretending to be a devil, right? Um,
SO actually including vicious people inside a group might
be productive for that group and whether, whether it
is an epistemic task or a moral task that
you are engaged in, um. So those are kind
of my three theoretical solutions to the problem. We
might might make a distinction between levels, individual collective
level virtues, a distinction between teleological and motivational virtues,
or just saying like, well, every group needs a
devil's advocate, and if we're going to have a
devil's advocate, maybe that's just have a devil. Um.
And I think, yeah, that it's, I, I like
the solution a lot um because it it is
kind of a solution of tolerance, right? Um BUT
rather than kind of saying that everybody should fix
themselves and become a kind of virtuous angel, I
mean, of course I would love that. I would
love that if we wouldn't have vicious people in
the world anymore, would probably be great, but Since
that's, you know, often going to be unproductive and
maybe an unrealistic goal to strive towards, then maybe
we should just try to be good enough together
and take the vicious people that are going to
be there anyway and try to figure out how
we can put them in a place that their
vice is as As harmless as possible, and maybe
even productive for the rest of the group.
So, anything else we need to know about Mendevillian
virtues and vices before we wrap up our conversation?
Anything else you need to know about Mandevillian virtues
and vices. I think I've probably said already the
most important things, um. I am going to be
working on this topic in the future as well,
uh, so do, do kind of keep my, um,
do check out my web page.
OK, yeah, and apart from your web page, where
can people find you and your work on the
internet?
Yeah, I think my web page is actually the
best, but you can also send me an email
at m. Dot Atola at Tuft.nl. Um, I love
getting emails from people, so if anyone wants to
um sort of challenge my viewpoints, um, or tell
me that I'm completely wrong or that I'm completely
right, uh, do reach out to me. I like
that a lot.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
real pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you. It's been a, this has been a
real pleasure and um yeah, thanks for having me
on the show.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullern, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexand Castle, Matthew Whitting Barna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matri
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnsergoro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, asilla dearraujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick
Punterrusmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary
Galman Sam of Zallidrianei Poultonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon
Corteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianeau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old
Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff
McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.